Add initialization and error handling (#3632)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/how-to/hip_runtime_api/initialization.rst

.. meta::
   :description: Initialization.
   :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, initialization

********************************************************************************
Initialization
********************************************************************************

The initialization involves setting up the environment and resources needed for
using GPUs. The following steps are covered with the initialization:

- Setting up the HIP runtime

  This includes loading necessary libraries and setting up internal data
  structures.

- Querying and setting GPUs

  Identifying and querying the available GPU devices on the system.

> - Setting up contexts

Reviewer: This topic appears under the Setting GPUs section from the topic above. The final step of the Initialization process seems to be Finalize?

Reviewer 2: I removed the finalize section, because it was not fully covered and not part of initialization. I just wanted to add a note, that after hipDeviceReset(), first API call re-initialize the HIP API.

  Creating contexts for each GPU device, which are essential for managing
  resources and executing kernels. For further details, check the :ref:`context
  section <context_driver_api>`.

> Initialize the HIP runtime

Reviewer: I think this could use a bit more exposition regarding what setting up or initializing the runtime does or provides. The text mentions that it is set up automatically, but what is the advantage of setting it up manually versus auto? If there isn't much more to say than this, then is it needed in the text?

Reviewer 2: Added the use cases, when the hipInit useful and added the hipDeviceReset note here too.

================================================================================

The HIP runtime is initialized automatically when the first HIP API call is
made. However, you can explicitly initialize it using :cpp:func:`hipInit`,
to be able to control the timing of the initialization.

Querying and setting GPUs
================================================================================

> If multiple GPUs are available, it's worth to query and select the desired GPU(s)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple GPUs are available in the system, you can query and select the desired GPU(s) to use
```

> based on properties. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
based on device properties, such as ... 
```

.. meta::
   :description: Initialization.
   :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, initialization

********************************************************************************
Initialization
********************************************************************************

The initialization involves setting up the environment and resources needed for
using GPUs. The following steps are covered with the initialization:

- Setting up the HIP runtime

  This includes loading necessary libraries and setting up internal data
  structures.

- Querying and setting GPUs

  Identifying and querying the available GPU devices on the system.

- Setting up contexts

>   Creating contexts for each GPU device, which are essential for managing

Reviewer: This context section needs to be imported into this initialization topic rather than simply referenced from the CUDA driver section. It is listed as the third step in initializing the runtime, yet very little information is provided regarding setting up and managing the context. The Context management API even appears to be deprecated, meaning the context must be managed through some other mechanism? What are the elements of the context? What does it provide to the runtime?

  resources and executing kernels. For further details, check the :ref:`context
  section <context_driver_api>`.

Initialize the HIP runtime
================================================================================

The HIP runtime is initialized automatically when the first HIP API call is
made. However, you can explicitly initialize it using :cpp:func:`hipInit`,
to be able to control the timing of the initialization. The manual

> initialization can be useful, when you ensure that the GPU is initialized and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
initialization can be useful to ensure that the GPU is initialized and
```

ready, or to isolate GPU initialization time from other parts of
your program.

> 

Reviewer 3: We can add a little more detail on what is being done during HIP Initialization, such as:
- Reading the environment variables set during init, and setting up the active or visible devices etc.
- Initializes the compiler as well as HSA runtime and checks any errors due to lack of resources or no active devices etc.
- Also, sets up some internal buffers which will be used for memory copies or cooperative launches.

Reviewer 2: Updated the description at the previous section.

> ready or you want to isolate the GPU initialization time from other parts of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ready, or to isolate GPU initialization time from other parts of
```

.. note::

>   :cpp:func:`hipDeviceReset()` deletes all streams created, memory allocated, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can use :cpp:func:`hipDeviceReset()` to delete all streams created, memory allocated, 
```

Reviewer: I think this is a good note to have, but wonder if there is some reason why the user would reset the device and need to reinitialize in the program? Maybe an example use case?

  kernels running and events created by the current process. Any new HIP API
  call initializes the HIP runtime again.

Querying and setting GPUs
================================================================================

If multiple GPUs are available in the system, you can query and select the
desired GPU(s) to use based on device properties, such as size of global memory,
size shared memory per block, support of cooperative launch and support of
managed memory.

Querying GPUs
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> The properties of a gpu can be queried using :cpp:func:`hipGetDeviceProperties`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The properties of a GPU can be queried using :cpp:func:`hipGetDeviceProperties`,
```

> which returns a struct of :cpp:struct:`hipDeviceProp_t`. This struct can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which returns a struct of :cpp:struct:`hipDeviceProp_t`. The properties in the struct can be
```

used to identify a device or give an overview of hardware characteristics, that

> might make one gpu better suited for the task at hand than others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might make one GPU better suited for the task than others. 
```

The :cpp:func:`hipGetDeviceCount` function returns the number of available GPUs,
which can be used to loop over the available GPUs.

Example code of querying GPUs:

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include <hip/hip_runtime.h>
  #include <iostream>

  int main() {

      int deviceCount;
      if (hipGetDeviceCount(&deviceCount) == hipSuccess){
          for (int i = 0; i < deviceCount; ++i){
              hipDeviceProp_t prop;
              if ( hipGetDeviceProperties(&prop, i) == hipSuccess)

>                   std::cout << "Device" << i << prop.name << std::endl;

Reviewer: Surely I am not choosing a GPU on the basis of the device name? Maybe capture the props in an array, and then sort through them to find what you are looking for?

.. meta::
   :description: Initialization.
   :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, initialization

********************************************************************************
Initialization
********************************************************************************

> Initialization involves setting up the environment and resources needed for GPU
> computation. The following steps are covered with the initialization:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The initialization involves setting up the environment and resources needed for
using GPUs. The following steps are covered with the initialization:
```

Also this should mention, that initialization is done automatically by HIP, and does not *need* to be done manually, but can be done manually for more control (timing on when HIP is initialized, what GPU to use)

Reviewer 2: We are mentioning this later.

> - Initialize the HIP runtime

Reviewer 4: Hm. This is kind of redundant - the initialization starts with the initialization, but "setting up" also doesn't quite fit, as the function is literally called `hipInit`
```suggestion
- Setting up the HIP runtime
```

  This includes loading necessary libraries and setting up internal data
  structures.

> - Querying and set GPU devices

Reviewer 4: Consistent style:
```suggestion
- Querying and setting GPUs
```
And either GPUs or devices, but not GPU device

  Identifying and querying the available GPU devices on the system.

- Setting up contexts

  Creating contexts for each GPU device, which are essential for managing

>   resources and executing kernels. For further details, check :ref:`context

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  resources and executing kernels. For further details, check the :ref:`context
```

  section <context_driver_api>`.

Initialize the HIP runtime
================================================================================

The HIP runtime is initialized automatically when the first HIP API call is

> made. However, you can explicitly initialize it using :cpp:func:`hipInit`
> function, to be able to control the timing of the initialization. The explicit

Reviewer 4: Either "the [...] function", or just by name
```suggestion
made. However, you can explicitly initialize it using :cpp:func:`hipInit`,
to be able to control the timing of the initialization. The explicit
```

initialization example code:

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include <hip/hip_runtime.h>
  
  hipError_t err = hipInit(0);
  if (err != hipSuccess)
  {
      // Handle error
  }

> 

Reviewer 4: This example code doesn't really add much.

Reviewer 2: Removed.

.. note::

  Include the HIP runtime header in your source file, if you want access HIP

>   functions.

Reviewer 4: I agree, that this needs to be mentioned somewhere, however this is quite normal for any library/framework that one is using. The only reason this needs to be highlighted, is for CUDA users, because nvcc implicitly includes the corresponding header. So maybe this should rather be added to the CUDA porting guide?

Reviewer 2: It's already mentioned in the porting guide. Removing the note.

> The initialization includes the following steps:

Reviewer 4: Seems like this sentence was overlooked
```suggestion
```

> Querying and set GPU devices

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Querying and setting GPUs
```

================================================================================

> 

Reviewer 4: Short introduction of this section - if several gpus are available, and a specific one is desired, its properties can be queried, and on that information a decision for what gpu to use can be made

Reviewer 2: Added text.

Querying GPU devices
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Before using a GPU device, you might want to query its properties:

Reviewer 4: Mention the functions and link to their reference.
Something like:
The properties of a gpu can be queried using :cpp:func:hipGetDeviceProperties, which returns/provides a struct of :cpp:struct:hipDeviceProp_t, that can be used to identify a device or give an overview of hardware characteristics that might make one gpu better suited for the task at hand than others.

Also mention hipGetDeviceCount to link to its reference

Reviewer 2: Added updated text.

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include <hip/hip_runtime.h>
  #include <iostream>

>   int deviceCount;

Reviewer 4: This code does not compile out of the box, even though the includes make it seem as if it was a stand-alone file. Consider either wrapping the example code in a function or remove the includes to make it seem as if it was a block out of some other function/main

Reviewer 2: Update code.

  if (hipGetDeviceCount(&deviceCount) == hipSuccess){
      for (int i = 0; i < deviceCount; ++i){
          hipDeviceProp_t prop;
          if ( hipGetDeviceProperties(&prop, i) == hipSuccess)
              std::cout << "Device" << i << prop.name << std::endl;
      }
  }

> Set GPU device

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Setting the GPU
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Select the GPU device to be used for subsequent HIP operations:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Select the GPU to be used for subsequent HIP operations:
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include <hip/hip_runtime.h>

  int deviceId = 0; // Example: selecting the first device

>   hipError_t err = hipSetDevice(deviceId);

Reviewer 4: Similar to before: Either wrap in a function or remove the includes, to not make it look like it's a stand-alone file

Also: This example code is not adding much. It is just showing how to call a function

Reviewer 2: Removed.

  if (err != hipSuccess)
  {
      // Handle error
  }

This function performs several key tasks:

- Context Binding

  Binds the current thread to the context of the specified GPU device. This 
  ensures that all subsequent operations are executed on the selected device.

- Resource Allocation

  Prepares the device for resource allocation, such as memory allocation and
  stream creation.

- Check device availablity

  Checks for errors in device selection and ensures that the specified device is

>   available and capable of executing HIP operations.

Reviewer 4: Or returns an error. The function itself does not guarantee, that the selected device is working

Reviewer 2: Updated.

Finalize
================================================================================

> The :cpp:func:`hipDeviceReset()` deletes all streams created, memory allocated,

Reviewer 4: Either "The [...] function" or just "hipDeviceReset()"
```suggestion
:cpp:func:`hipDeviceReset()` deletes all streams created, memory allocated,
```

> kernels running, events created. Make sure that no other thread is using the

Reviewer 4: What's the scope of this operation? Device-wide? Process-wide? Thread-wide?
```suggestion
kernels running and events created (by this process?). Make sure that no other thread is using the
```

> device or streams, memory, kernels, events associated with the current device.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
device or streams, memory, kernels or events associated with the current device.
```

> Any new HIP API call initialize the HIP runtime again. The example code:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Any new HIP API call initializes the HIP runtime again.
```

.. code-block:: cpp

  #include <hip/hip_runtime.h>

  hipError_t err = hipDeviceReset();
  if (err != hipSuccess)
  {
      // Handle error

>   }

Reviewer 4: I don't think this needs its own example code block

Reviewer 2: Removed.
